---
title: "Radical"
date: "2020-07-30"
---

Radical is an atom, molecule, or ion that has an unpaired valence electron, these unpaired electrons make radicals highly chemically reactive. Many radicals spontaneously dimerize, which is the process of combining similar molecules to form a new product.

Most organic radicals have short lifetimes and may be generated in a number of ways by typical methods. Ionizing radiation, heat, electrical discharges, and electrolysis are known to produce radicals.

Radicals are intermediates in many chemical reactions, more so than is apparent from the balanced equations.

A majority of natural products are generated by radical generating enzymes. They also play a key role in the intermediary metabolism of various biological compounds. 

Such radicals can even be messengers in a process dubbed redox signalling, in which the reduction-oxidation process is analysed.

A radical may be trapped within a solvent cage or be otherwise bound. This effect describes the properties of molecules that are affected by the surrounding.

Radicals typically exhibit paramagnetism and electron spin resonance is the definitive and widely used technique for characterizing radicals.

### Etymology

Until late in the 20th century the word "radical" was used in chemistry to indicate any connected group of atoms. The term radical is derived from the Latin word "radix" meaning "root".

### Reference

[https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radical\_(chemistry)](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Radical_(chemistry))
